Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Di Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez,
and today I'm joined by Doctor Sean McMicken. He's
Francis Flournoy, Professor of European History and Culture at
Bard College. And today we're going to talk about
his book To Overthrow the World, The Rise and
Fall and Rise of communism. So Doctor Mcin, Mac
Min, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Oh, thank you for having me, Ricardo. It's great
to be here.
So what motivated you to write this book?
Well, it's actually easier to answer that question than
it might ordinarily be. Um, I can almost date
it to a conversation I had several years ago
at the height of the COVID lockdowns with uh
an English historian friend of mine called Nick Lloyd,
he writes a lot on the First World War.
Um, HE'S doing a trilogy at the moment, Western
Front, Eastern Front both come out and he's gonna
do another history of the Middle Eastern Front. And
we've worked together at times or spoken together at
events over the years, and we were just jawboning
back and forth about. The lockdowns and travel restrictions
and the mask mandates and all these other things,
and how difficult it was to do anything, or
travel or go anywhere or do research or even
see people, and we started musing aloud whether this
might have been what it was like under communism,
and, and he said, why don't you write a
history of communism? And so there it is. So
the, the reason that the broader I suppose cause,
uh, the longer term cause you might say, instead
of the proximate cause of my tackling the subject.
As I've been working on aspects of the history
of communism on and off for many years, where
I actually kind of began my my career as
a historian, um. Way back in the 1990s, I
grew up against the backdrop of the fall of
the Soviet Union was in the headlines, uh, fall
of the Berlin Wall, uh, fall of the USSR,
um, so from a very early age, I was
always fascinated by the subject, and it's really where
I first kind of cut my teeth as a
historian doing a lot of research in Moscow in
the old communist archives, which always had an interesting
frisson to me, the uh the secrets, the buried
secrets suddenly laid bare, even if some of those
archives unfortunately are closing up again. And so I've
been working on and off on the subject for
years, and it just kind of struck me. I
mean, why, why not try to do a kind
of a a general summing up of what we
know also because, um, and I think that's really
the angle of the book, the subtitle about the
rise and fall and and rise of communism is
that 20 or 30 years ago, I think many
of us in the west had this idea, well,
goodbye to all that, thank goodness that's all finished.
Um, THERE'S even a book by Richard Pipes, a
historian I I admire, but who tried to sum
up history of communism about 25 years ago by
saying he was writing its obituary, that is, that
it was dead and buried in behind us, and
I'm not quite sure that's the case. So I,
I thought the story deserved a new treatment from
a new perspective, um, not least because a lot
of history has passed since we first thought that
communism was dead and buried.
So we won't have time to go through even
the main and most important events in the history
of communism here, but let's try to at least
cover some of them. What would you say are
the origins of communism?
Well, one could go back very far and in
in the book I talk about certain antecedents antecedents,
even in the history of Christianity, um. In the
history of Greco-Roman philosophy. Obviously one can go back
as far as one wants to trace the kind
of ideal of equality between men, or at least
the equality of all souls, the equality of all
believers in the Christian tradition, notions of charity and
the renunciation of material wealth. But I think the
story really starts to come together in a big
way in the 18th century, some combination of, not
necessarily the mainstream French Enlightenment thinkers, but Uh, Rousseau
was an obvious one that people sometimes talk about,
even though he didn't go quite as far as
laying out a vision of forcible social equality in
the material sense. He certainly talked in the social
contract about the idea of a radically egalitarian political
community where. All citizens are equal and then effectively
those who are not citizens are put outside the
community and can even be put to death. It
was, it was a lesser known enlightenment thinker called
Etienne Morley, who was writing at the same time
of Rousseau, who actually spelled out much more explicitly.
And his inspiration was, was quite literally Christian. He
thought the greatest. Sin basically was greed or avarice,
and so the only way to produce a kind
of a truly existing Christianity would be to eradicate
all material inequality, to have a radical community of
egalitarianism, with even strict rationing of all material goods.
Um, NOW, a lot of people would say this
is a heresy of what Christianity was meant to
be, but his inspiration clearly was Christian. I mean,
this comes out of the Western Christian eschatological tradition,
almost the idea of a final judgment. Um, THE
story really starts to pick up though with uh
political activist who was inspired by part Rousseau, but
really more morally in his vision of extreme social
equality. Oh, that was Gracus Babeuf, uh, Francois Noel
Babeuf was his original name. He took the name
Gracchus as a kind of nom de guerre during
the French Revolution. Uh, HE was an interesting figure
who as a, as a kind of a law
clerk managing manorial property roles, the old tradition of
Mortmain. The the literal inequality of of the old
French system with the three states and the aristocracy
and so forth, with the various obligations peasants had
to their lords. He knew a lot about the
kind of nitty gritty of inequality and old regime
France and and that part was fair enough. He
wanted reform, but he went much further. Basically, once
They got rid of these laws, he was kind
of out of a job, so he became a
political activist and drawing on his reading of these
radical enlightenment thinkers, he decided in the end that
the revolution hadn't gone far enough. You know, even
the the Roussoian version of of the terror under
Robespierre when People outside the political community were being
put to death, um, as enemies of the people
effectively, that still wasn't far enough. Yeah, they had
to go even further and they had to have
forcible social equality with the confiscation of property. What
was interesting about this, and the reason that it
inspired Marx and Lenin and later revolutionaries was that
he was quite upfront about what it required. He's
not saying like in some airy fairy utopian sense,
we can just wave our magic wands and suddenly
everyone will be equal. No, he said this is
going to require radical cleansing political violence. Uh, LITERAL
explicit talk about putting enemies to death, and those
who resist will be put to death, and they
will be exterminated and all the rest of it,
realizing that to Eradicate inequality, you would literally need
to, of course, rob people, confiscate wealth, nationalize property,
put it all in the hands of some revolutionary
committee. Never really quite got to the details of
what things were supposed to look like afterwards, but
the vision, and and this is the thing I
think some people get wrong. People think that, you
know, communists are all necessarily um idealists in some
sense of like maybe even pacifism or they think
that. You know, they're against violence. No, the violence
is a huge part of both the ideology, but
also, I honestly think of the attraction, you know,
I think that a lot of people are attracted
this precisely because it offers this vision of kind
of radical cleansing political violence. Certainly that appealed to
Marx. You look through all this rhetoric, you know,
he's quite explicit about this. The only the only
chance Marx ever had to sort of say, look,
What might it look like in practice, not necessarily
the final vision of communism, but rather the, the
rupture, the power seizure was the Paris commune of
1871 in the wake of the Franco-Prussian War, and
a lot of people thought, because the communars were
not necessarily strict Marxists or strict communists, they hadn't
necessarily read the communist manifesto, they didn't endorse all
of its kind of bullet point programs, the the
program of the communist manifesto, which was quite explicit
about. Uh, THE eradication of private property, the centralization
of credit in the banks, the nationalization of agriculture,
all the rest of it. Um, THEY weren't, you
know, very good doctrinaire communists, but nonetheless, they had
this radical vision, they wanted to overturn the order
and they put a lot of people to death.
And so some people thought Marx should distance himself
from it quite the opposite. He said, no, absolutely,
you know, this is how you do it, and
even if it's imperfect, you know, you, you kind
of kill a lot of people, you, you create
this radical vision and even if you fail, then
this is an inspiration to others who will get
it. You know, get it right the next time.
That the political violence is really an essential part
of the story, you know, even when Marx even
said like they complained that women and children were
thrown into battle and killed, or they complained that
they ended they executed these innocent bourgeois hostages including
the Archbishop of Paris. They burned down buildings. Marx
said, absolutely, you must do all those things, you
know, arson is fine, executions of class enemies fine,
women and children in battle, mass cleansing violence, it's
all great. Then Lenin takes it even further, you
know, and he's learning kind of on the fly
from Marx in his career and from history, and
so he learns that first of all, the best
chance for revolution is in the course of the
war, Franco-Prussian War, and later on the First World
War, the Russo-Japanese War. So he calls that revolutionary
defeatism. And that part I've I've talked about a
lot of other books. The part that I talked
a little bit more explicitly about in this book
was that Lenin also even spelled out. How he
thought it would happen and what would come next
in this, this, um, relatively little known but important
pamphlet called the Military Program of the proletarian Revolution,
uh, which he wrote in 1916 during the First
World War. A lot of other people are kind
of Recoiling from the violence of the First World
War. Oh, it's awful. Let's end the war. And
Lenin said, no, no, no, this is exactly what
we need. We Turn the imperialist war into a
civil war. You get guns into the hands of
the soldiers, they will then become class warriors. You'll
get this apocalyptic class war, class revolution. They'll turn
their guns against their oppressors, against their officers, you'll
have mass mutinies and civil war, and mass violence.
And then once the communists are in power in
one country, they'll be in a state of opposition
to all the non-communist countries. And so then you'll
get wars between the communist countries and the non-communist
countries, and basically this whole kind of Endless series
of of spiraling violence and war, and he wasn't
saying I hope this doesn't happen. He was saying,
I hope it does happen. That's exactly what he
wanted to happen. And he even cited Marx on
this business about, well, yes, we will need to
throw women and children into battle. And so even
like what you what you would see later with
the Red Guards in China and that sort of
thing, you know, children being thrown into battle, it's
all right there already in Marx and Lenin.
Right. So, uh let's then talk a little bit
about the first rise of communism that you refer
to in the subtitle of your book. So what
led first to the Russian revolution? How did it
happen?
Well, a lot of it had to do, of
course, with Lenin and his particular vision that I've
already talked about, but he would not have been
able to achieve any of this without A fortunate
series of circumstances breaking his way. I mean, what,
what did make Lenin effective, you know, were two
things. One, again, is he saw the war as
an opportunity. I mean, they, they had this interesting
debate in what was called the Second International before
the First World War. This is the Second Working
Men's International Association. Marx had founded the first in
1864. The second was founded in Paris in 1889.
And the great tragedy, at least from the perspective
of kind of more sympathetic historians of of the
left or socialists or communists was always that, you
know, they got it wrong, they had some good
ideas, but they didn't carry them through. What what
they tried to do, and they talked about the
idea of a Massen strike or a general strike
was that once there might be a war between
the so-called capitalist powers or the imperialist powers that
You know, the workers, the ones who were kind
of mining the coal and building the weapons and
forging the metal, you know, they could all stop
working, and this would kind of prevent the war.
And you know, Lenin kind of bandied around the
idea along with some others, but in the end
he actually thought there was a better idea, which
is basically, you know, look, if the war is
gonna happen, it's gonna happen, so you take advantage
of it, you seize the moment. So this is
this revolution of defeatism I was talking about, but
basically spreading mass mutinies. There's a slogan turning the
imperialist war into a civil war. So first of
all, the First World War has to happen for
this even to become possible or practicable. There had
been a little bit of a dry run in
Russia in 194, 195 during the Russo-Japanese War, and
Lenin had realized in the course of that war,
he didn't play much of a role in the
revolution. He was mostly in exile in those years
and kind of came back to Russia at the
last minute and didn't really do even as much
as Trotsky and a few others, but He was
very good at reading the events, which was that
Russia lost the war. Japan very clearly defeated Russia,
sneak attack on Port Arthur in the Pacific, um,
followed by a series of land battles, the siege,
and this great naval battle at Tsushima, Russia was
absolutely humiliated in that war, uh, particularly because it
was a kind of non-European power, and this is
the age when the Europeans really thought that they
were still. Uh, SUPERIOR, whether in racial, cultural civilizational
sense to non-European people. So it's a huge wake-up
call, a huge embarrassment, and humiliation of the Russian
government. And it nearly got toppled in a revolution
in 195. You know, the Tsar had to back
down, made concessions, so-called October manifesto, he allows for
the first time a real parliament called the Duma
in Russia, the various concessions. Basically, the point being,
Russia back down. It didn't go quite far enough
from Lenin's perspective, but the fact was that losing
a war is what made it possible. Now, during
the First World War, and Lenin is mostly in
exile in Switzerland under effectively the protection of the
central powers who saw him as a potential useful.
ALLY was the Austrians, not the German, the Austrians
first sent him to Switzerland, the Germans who later
sent him to uh Russia, those being the central
powers at war with the so-called ntente, Britain, France,
and Russia. So because Lenin was this kind of
sworn enemy of the tsar and of the Russian
Tsarist regime, he was seen as useful by the
central powers. Lenin for his own part. Both used
this as an opportunity, but then he also theorized,
and he was quite explicit about it, that what
he wanted to do was to bring about the
defeat of his own country, and he even used
one's own country and kind of inverted quote marks.
That is, he's an anti-patriot, you know, he wants
his country to lose the war because that way.
The government will be humiliated, weakened, its prestige, cratered,
etc. So then you can strike and you can
overthrow the government. And he proceeds to do this
quite literally in 1917. Again, initially he's in exile.
The Tsar is toppled in this revolution, the so-called
February revolution. The Tsar abdicates it's a complicated story
and Lenin has very little to do with it.
A lot of this had to do with kind
of internal Russian politics and obviously there was a
lot of dissatisfaction. There were a lot of also
opportunists. The thing about the Federal revolution, I think
a lot of people get wrong, is they think
it was this kind of upwelling of anti-war sentiment.
It was almost the opposite. In fact, most of
the dissatisfaction with the Tsar, particularly in Russian high
society and in kind of the rumor mongering and
so on, that was making people paranoid and riling
them up, was the idea that in fact the
Tsarist regime was kind of honeycombed with pro-German traitors,
you know, that's what the whole Rasputin affair was
about, that Rasputin was seen as a kind of
a A pro-German traitor, and that's why he had
to be killed, and he literally was killed by
a member of the Tsar's own family and a
high born Russian aristocrat uh called Felix Yusupov. They
were doing it because they wanted to get the
pro-German black bloc click out of the way. You
know, they wanted to to prosecute the war. In
fact, even, even the key generals at headquarters, Stavka,
who in the end sort of They didn't green
light the revolution exactly, but they convinced the czar
to abdicate because they believed that it would help
Russia win the war. And long story short, the
February revolution is not anti-war. It's, there's a lot
of misunderstanding, but basically a lot of the key
figures are actually pro-war. They want to continue the
war. Even Karensky who emerges as the kind of
radical but not quite. Communist figure, he comes from
this party called the Socialist Revolutionary Party. They were
not Marxists, they were more of a peasant-based party,
was actually pro-war. He wanted to kind of prosecute
the war. But it becomes increasingly difficult over the
course of the spring and the summer. And some
of this is just war weariness, which is natural
after the First World War had been burning for
3 years. But what happens is that Lenin. IS
allowed to return to Russia. He's sent there by
the Germans who want to undermine the Russian war
effort. Now Lenin, of course, is using the Germans
in the same way they're using him. They kind
of line up on this question. The Germans want
Russia to lose the war, Lenin wants Russia to
lose the war. And so Lenin works to help
Russia lose the war. Uh, HE has German money,
this allows him to buy up a printing press,
cash on the barrelhead, and then they start flooding
the armies first just the the rear guard units
in in Petrograd, Petersburg, later Leningrad, the capital, then.
And then the units nearby, the Baltic Fleet, eventually
by about summer, they finally reached kind of the
frontline armies right as Kerensky is ordering this offensive
in Galicia and kind of the contested area between
Austria-Hungary, and Russia. And so you get this almost
bonfire of the mutinies where there's a mutiny back
in Petrograd that we refer to as the July
days. There are mutinies near the front, all of
it fueled by communist propaganda. Again, Lenin is literally
promoting mutinies. That's pretty much the program. That's what
the story of what would later be the October
Revolution is about. It's kind of like this gigantic
mutiny. You know, even the Red Guards who later
are the kind of muscle that helped Lenin. Uh,
ACHIEVE power first in the capital and then in
other cities. Nearly all of them are either disaffected
soldiers or they're deserters, or some of them are
even active duty members of the Tsarist Imperial Army,
the former Tsarist Imperial Army now fighting for the
so-called provisional government or uh the Imperial Navy, uh,
which is mostly in the Baltic, which is quite
critical in the story because it's so close to
Petrograd, particularly there's a base nearby in Cocklin Island,
crunch that's a base in Helsinki. Uh, SO these
mutinies are actively promoted by Lenin the Bolsheviks. So
in, in, in, in the initial sense, that's sort
of what the communist program, at least for seizing
power is. And Lenin is quite explicit about this.
He's reading Clausewitz, he's obsessed with kind of military
affairs, and it's all about force, like how many
men do we have on their arms, how many
men do they have on ours. Stalin would later
Uh, turned this almost into an aphorism when he
was once asked about, uh, the Pope, the Vatican,
and he said something like, well, yeah, how many
divisions does the Pope have? In other words, it's
like literally you're, you're getting arms in the hands
of these kind of impressionable violent young men and
making sure you have more men under arms than
the enemy. And that's in the end what they
did. Karesky plays a lot of things wrong. There's
a thing called the Korneoff affair where he crosses
swords with basically the commander in chief of the
armies, incredibly stupid, forfeited the support of the officer
corps. He weakened critically any support his regime had
in the army. So then in the end, most
of the army sort of almost just, they were
neutral. They kind of played dead during what would
be called the October Revolution. The Bolsheviks seized power
and then, you know, it was not as violent
as it might have been in Petrograd because there
they had already so thoroughly propagandized the rear guard
units. In Moscow and a few other cities, they
actually had to fight their way into power, and
there's, you know, they're literally like shelling the Kremlin.
It's a very violent power seizure across Russia, uh,
which then Dovetails with this kind of gigantic demobilization
of the army. Basically it's like a mutiny, um,
but what they wanted, this is also part of
Lenin's program is he wanted the army to be
demobilized, but he wanted the soldiers to leave with
their arms so that they could then, you know,
be enrolled in either the Red Guards or the
Red Army. In the end they had to kind
of make a few compromises. They had to bring
back a few of the old officers because they
realized they didn't know how to run an army,
and eventually they even brought back the death penalty,
which initially they had opposed when the soldiers were
loyal to the old regime. Um, SO it's really
a story about kind of uh mutiny, propaganda, you
know, the army, but in the end, you know,
what they needed to do is to get arms
into the hands of impressionable young men, and that
was only possible because of the war.
And later, how did it, how did communism go
international? How did it go, how did it spread
from Russia to China and other countries?
Well, some of the ideas are spread through, of
course, propaganda through communist parties which were funded by
Moscow. Again, some of the ideas were already out
there, but the kind of the particular vision that
the commenter on the communist International wanted to impose
on parties, the so-called party line. That was devised
in Moscow, and then that was buttressed and supported
by agents, emissaries, funds, you know, the common turn
had a central kind of treasury. Oddly enough, the
currency that they kept accounts in was the US
dollar, ironically, um, the official language was actually German.
Um, BUT the whole thing was run out of
Moscow. And so, you know, they, they tell these
communist parties all over the world, they're totally funded
by Moscow. They, they had, they have these rules,
they're called the 21 conditions for membership. They spell
this all out. The parties are supposed to have
these kind of shadow governments ready to seize power.
Now in practice, it didn't usually happen that way.
I mean, a lot of the propaganda and a
lot of the funds were probably wasted because in
the end. Although communists at times would make inroads
in a few countries, like they had a few
successes in Germany, but then things kind of went
backwards. At times in France and Italy, they were
quite popular, although they never quite sniff power. Then
in the 30s, they were popular front governments where
the communists were kind of again, close to, but
not really quite having power. No, in the end
it required war just like it had for Lenin.
So you had a few episodes, um. Right after
the First World War in places like Hungary and
Germany, countries like Russia had lost the war, and
so, you know, they had this kind of copycat
Soviet style communist revolutions, but they didn't last very
long because again, they just basically they hadn't gotten
enough men under arms, and, you know, they were
defeated. It's very, very clear, you know, they were
just, they were defeated by arms. Um. Spain, you
know, the Soviets were able to take over the
so-called Pop Popular Front government there for a couple
of years from 36 to early 39, but they
lose that war too. Again, they succeeded for a
time, it was longer, maybe longer lived than the
revolutions in Hungary and Munich, but in the end,
it didn't last long enough. It really is only
after the Second World War that both there's enough
violence, there's enough chaos, there's enough destruction of the
social order, and most of all, and this is
the key bit. Enough impressionable, angry young men are
under arms who were able to start toppling governments.
And so it comes out of civil wars in
the same way in Russia, they turned the imperialist
war into a civil war, in Yugoslavia, out of
the Second World War, becomes a civil war. In
China, the war with Japan becomes a civil war.
And then nearly all these cases, even if there
were these kind of so-called native communist leaders, people
like uh Josip Bros, code named Tito in Yugoslavia,
or of course Mao Zedong in China, the two
most famous so-called kind of self-made, it's usually seen
like, oh well, no, they actually achieved power on
their own without Russian help. It's a total lie
in both cases. Broz Tito was taking instructions from
Moscow all along. He was a very loyal communist.
He oddly enough, got a lot of armed support
during the war before the Soviets were able to
start supplying him from Britain, and this is part
of the story that It's a little bit delicate
to talk about because so many people admire Winston
Churchill, but he really kind of got played uh
basically by some agents inside the British government and
the BBC and believing that the person Britain should
have been supporting that basically that the army fighting
on behalf of the Yugoslav exiled government in London,
the Royal Yugoslav exiled government in London that Britain
was hosting and supporting, Mikhailovich and the so-called Chetniks,
he abandons them, he throws his support to Tito.
Uh, UNBEKNOWNST to Churchill the whole time, Tito was
actually sending these reports back about Churchill's envoy, a
man named Fitzroy McLean. He's fully loyal to Stalin.
In fact, even the so-called Tito-Salin split that emerges
after the Second World War is not because Tito
was not a communist, rather it is because he
was in some ways more communist than Stalin. For
example, Tito wanted to spread communism to Greece, whereas
Stalin was at least willing to Except Churchill's deal,
the kind of percentages agreement that Greece was in
Britain's sphere of influence, so he wouldn't bother there.
Tito in some ways was actually more of a
revolutionary communist than, you know, Stalin at least tactically
when it came to various countries around Europe. Now,
Mao, it's true, was was ornery and eventually he
would break in a more serious way, probably because
he had no larger population, more resources. Uh, HE
would eventually break with the Soviets in the late
1950s, but when he came to power, He was
absolutely loyal to the Soviet Union. They had been
funding him all the way back since 1921. Um,
YOU know, the Long March, so called Long March,
all the elements in the Mao legend, if you
actually look at the evidence, you know, he's very
much under instructions from Moscow. Even the reason Mao
is able to survive uh the the war with
Japan, the Sino-Japanese War, which we can roughly date
from 1937 to 1945, even if Japan had already
occupied Manchuria back in 1931. Mao's forces did not
fight Japan because Stalin brokered a deal for him
with Japan. And so, again, it was a perfect
kind of setup for Mao, Japan and then the
Chinese nationalist forces of Chiang Kai-shek could kind of
destroy each other, and then he could turn this
war into again a civil war, of course, against
Chiang Kai-shek's forces once Japan withdrew. And he had
financial support and arms from the Soviet Union all
along. In fact, what was a little bit odd
about the Chinese Civil War from the kind of
broader geopolitical perspective is that it coincided with the
onset of the Cold War in Europe when the
so-called Truman Doctrine is when the US agrees it
will start supporting, you know, as they put it,
free peoples, maybe a little bit of humbug, but
the idea is they're supporting governments that are trying
to struggle against communist. Subversion and so forth, so
they support Greece and Turkey in the initial case,
and then of course eventually they bankroll and support
the NATO alliance and all the rest. While the
US is making these kind of commitments to stop
the spread of communism in Europe. The US is
abandoning Chiang Kai-shek in China. They actually cut him
off of all arms and all funds, whereas the
Soviets were not just sharing and funding Mao, but
they were kind of stepping things up. They had
established contact in Manchuria. They even gave Mao a
lot of the arms that they took from the
the kind of uh retreating Japanese armies after the
war. Um, AND so Mao is now fighting this
one-sided proxy war where he, he's getting everything he
needs from the Soviets. So, you know, again, it's
sure, Mao had his own. Peculiar fanaticism that obviously
allowed him to kind of inspire people in China,
but it's still part of this broader story where,
you know, you have the Soviet Union, which is
kind of arming its client states, and then that's,
you know, largely what the rest of the Cold
War is about. You have these odd sort of
anomalies in a place like Cuba where Fidel Castro
might not have been an orthodox communist, and in
fact even Officially, this is a little odd people
might be surprised to learn, officially in the Cold
War, Cuba was non-aligned. Uh, THEORETICALLY, Cuba was not
an aligned country, but of course, in practice, he
was a Soviet client and the Soviets were sending
him advisors, aid, missiles, money, etc. I mean, by
the by the late 1980s, the Soviets are actually
uh propping up his government to the tune of
almost $5 billion a year, which is a huge
amount of money in the 1980s and the communist
bloc. And that's part of the reason why Cuba's
economy collapsed after the fall of the Soviet Union,
because they, you know, they lost their subsidies. So,
you know, Soviet funding and arming was hugely important,
um, and that's really mostly how communism spread, you
know, along with opportunities presented by these civil wars,
you know, unfortunately, whenever there was civil war mayhem
or, you know, growing out of a World War,
uh, violence, death, destruction. This helped augur well for
the fortunes of communism, um, because that's basically how
communism spreads.
So let me ask you now then about the
fall of communism. Why and how did so many
communist regimes fall between 1989 and 1991? Well,
it's a great question, and, and to be, to
be honest, we don't have the full story yet,
like we have a lot more than we did
20 or 30 years ago. But obviously there are
a lot of files we still don't have access
to. Um, THE role of Mikhail Gorbachev is huge,
this is the last, of course, general secretary and
then later president, kind of a self-styled president of
the Soviet Union. Uh, WHO later on became a
figure almost of, of Sympathy in the West, I
think in part because the Cold War seemed to
end without at least a great power conflagration, even
if there was a lot of kind of small
as seemingly harmless figure hawking Pizza Hut and other
kind of western because he needed the money. The
thing people forget about Gorbachev is when he first
came to power in 1985, uh, the Cold War
was actually a very kind of tense moment, and
he was absolutely not installed in power in order
to preside over the demise of the Soviet Union.
It was not his goal. In fact, The goal
they even had a new 5 year plan. It
was the so-called 12th 5 year plan. Ucarea, this
is the kind of the uh the catchword which
is acceleration. Um, IN the US, uh, the Reagan
administration. And of course, been basically spending a lot
more both on the conventional military and talking about
this thing called strategic defense initiative or missile defense,
which would put a lot of pressure on the
Soviets strategically. The US had been backing initially mostly
through Pakistan. But then a little bit more and
more directly in the 1980s, uh, the Afghan resistance,
mujahideen, various factions fighting against the Soviet puppet communist
government of Afghanistan, which had been installed and then
propped up by a kind of Soviet armed coup
in 1979. Uh, THE Soviets had gotten sucked into
Afghanistan and We're kind of being bled there increasingly
by this US armed resistance that had things like
stinger missiles that they could use to to shoot
down Soviet helicopter gunships. Uh, SO things are very
tense, you know, there had been a few moments
in 1982, 1983, so Abel Archer, uh, kind of
episode when, you know, there had almost been a
scare of kind of nuclear war. There was a
whole nuclear freeze movement in Europe, so things were
very tense, and Gorbachev did not come to power
to preside over surrendering the Cold War. What happened
instead was a massive Soviet arms buildup to counter
Reagan's arms buildup. And in a lot of conventional
categories, another thing I don't think people realize about
the Gorbachev era and the Peter strike or reconstruction
that he talked about, is that the Soviets were
actually succeeding in terms of hardware. They're actually outproducing
the West, outproducing the US. In a lot of
categories, um, self-propelled artillery, tanks, even nuclear submarines, um,
yes, missiles. They were actually outproducing the US in
terms of hardware. The problem for the Soviet economy
was that, uh, basically they were being bankrupted by
uh the effort by this 12 5 year plan.
And yes, the consumer economy, and everyone knows this
part was was sort of rubbish, it was failing,
you know, they they were failing to keep up
an IT computers, the consumer sector was perishingly weak,
all that was true. But the main problem wasn't
necessarily that let's say Soviets didn't have enough kind
of soap and toilet paper, even though that was
probably true. The main problem was that the government
was increasingly becoming bankrupt. There's also a lot of
financial pressure being put by the Reagan administration. One
of the various ways in which they did this.
Uh, WAS by basically putting a lot of pressure
on the energy sector because the Soviets required, they
relied so much on energy exports. And so the
Reagan administration leaned on Saudi Arabia, they ramped up
production, oil prices cratered, this kind of hit the
Soviet bottom line. So by about 1989, you know,
again the the sort of The happier part of
the story is, oh, well, eventually you see in
Eastern Europe, you get the opening of the border
between Hungary and Austria, you get the emergence of
solidarity in Poland, you get the fall of the
Berlin Wall, that the happiest supposedly story is the
so-called Velvet Revolution in Prague. And you know, all
that was fine, but the backdrop of all this,
the reason the satellites were able to eventually to
spend free was because the Soviets were increasingly bankrupt
and they were desperate for Western loans. It gets
to a point in 1990 where Gorbachev is actually
begging for Dollars at these summits with, uh, US
President George Bush, the first Bush, uh, George Herbert
Walker Bush, literally begging for dollars. I mean, it's
almost kind of embarrassing to read the transcripts of
just how desperate Gorbachev was. You know, he wanted
the US to give him $50 billion or $100
billion basically, just so that he could afford to
prop up what was left of the Soviet security
establishment. Um, BECAUSE, yes, there were some kind of
uh centrifugal forces, there were movements in the Caucasus
and Central Asia, more importantly in the Baltic states
where these kind of national movements had emerged, and
they simply couldn't afford at all, they couldn't afford
the Afghan war, but also holding on to the
Baltics and here and there, and also spending for
the arms buildup. It was a kind of a
triage, and meanwhile, at some point a lot of
Soviet insiders must have realized which way the wind
was blowing and so. They started laundering funds, and
we know a lot of kind of KGB people
who had access to funds. It really is quite
an amazing story, and again we, by no means
could we understand the full extent of it. We
know for example that like the Soviet gold reserves
vanished, you know, they just disappear. We know that,
you know, vast amounts of kind of the cash
holdings of the Soviet central bank, they all disappear
in just the course of several years and Now
part of the story, a lot of people in
the rest of the world were familiar with, oh,
suddenly you have all these Russian oligarchs showing up
like with their yachts and all the rest of
it like, where did they come from? Well, sure,
some of them were business people who maybe had
export or import licenses or they exported oil, or
they imported some product and sold it. A lot
of them. We're just kind of cashing in on
the old connections. They were like rats fleeing a
sinking ship. You know, now maybe Gorbachev could have
held it together. Maybe better leadership might have allowed
them to endure. There, there are a lot of
people who've investigated this and said that Gorbachev made
humongous mistakes. And one of the mistakes he actually
made, and I talk about this in the book,
is that It's a bit like what happens in
1917 in Russia when I talked about Kerensky losing
the support of the officers with the so-called Kornilov
affair. Uh, DURING some of the episodes in which
the Soviet security forces and in some cases actually
literally the army is cracking down on dissent and
protests, places like Almaty and places like Tbilisi and
places like Riga and places like Vilnius. They were
doing this, and they were basically succeeding. I mean,
that, you know, this is a fearsome apparatus we're
talking about, but Gorbachev. Actually kind of held some
of the generals to account. He called them out
by name in public, and he embarrassed them, and
he accused them of basically killing people, even though
he was the one who gave the orders. I
mean, it was all he wanted to be loved
and liked you could some of this you need
to read Machiavelli, I think, to understand in the
end, of course, he ended up being neither loved
nor feared, and so he lost the support of
the officers. So what happens in the '91 coup,
which is a complicated story, but part of what
happens is that Again, whether it was Gorbachev for
the men he appointed, Gorbachev's role is still a
little bit murky in the story of this of
this thwarted coup, and Yeltsin famously stands in the
tank and talks about this anti-democratic right-wing anti-constitutional coup
d'etat. Right wing being ironic because of course it
was a kind of the communists trying to go
back to power. Well, In the in the army
mutiny, so it was yet again a story of
mutiny. Um, YOU know, I think a lot of
the world can be very fortunate that the Soviet
army, particularly with its vast nuclear arsenal, didn't go
down fighting in this way and that Yeltsin was
able to secure the nuclear arsenal most of it
anyway, and secure the codes and so on and
so forth, and Yeltsin turned out to be very
kind of pro-West. Of course, a lot of Russians
today think he was on the Western payroll or
something, but Gorbachev basically kind of misplayed everything. Um,
AND again, it seemed like a very salutary ending
to a lot of people in the West at
the time, and obviously it was great for the
peoples of Eastern Europe that were allowed to spin
free. I mean, a lot of that was negotiated
too. The Soviets negotiated in exchange for withdrawing troops
from East Germany and other countries, they got a
little bit of financial compensation, probably not as much
as others people I think Gorbachev would have liked,
but it's kind of almost like bribery. The Soviets
withdrew, um. And so in that sense, communism vanished
simply because the sword is lifted both in the
satellite countries and then in Russia. Of course, the
opposite happens in China, Tiananmen Square, and that's another
story, but there. The communist regime under a lot
of pressure with mass protests building with the cameras
rolling, decides, well, you know what, unlike Gorbachev, I'm
fine with not being loved, and this is kind
of Deng Xiaoping and a couple of his top
advisers, and they decide, no, it's fine, we will
shed blood, and we will, you know, we will
fire on the protesters. um. And that in the
end was what Gorbachev, I suppose, just didn't have
the stomach to do. And so a lot of
people could be fortunate for this, although obviously in
the ensuing chaos, um, you know, a lot of
other people suffered.
OK, so, uh, I'm getting a little bit mindful
of your time. So let me just combine two
questions here to wrap up our conversation. What is
then the second rise of communism that you refer
to in the book? How has it played out
and how popular would you say is communism nowadays?
Well, it's a good question. Um, I mean there
there's several different levels I think we're talking about
here. Maybe you could talk several different stories that
are interrelated, but they're not all exactly the same.
I mean, so in, in the most literal sense,
you have in Russia the endurance of the Communist
Party, unlike let's say in 1945, when with Hitler's
death, death, Nazism just kind of disappears from the
world, even if people are always talking about neo-Nazism
or Nazi that, you know, there there's no such
thing, you know, the party doesn't exist, you know,
there's no real kind of cause, there's no real
organization. The Communist Party endured in Russia. In fact,
there was a trial in 1992, and at the
time it was covered a little bit like, oh,
here's a Nuremberg for communism. And you know, there
were these truth and reconciliation commissions in countries like
East Germany where they were actually reckoning with the
Stasi, the secret police, and what they had done,
and people could go and investigate the files and
all this. People were hoping the same thing would
happen in Russia, this reckoning. Um, YOU know, people
would be reminded or exposed for the first time
to all the crimes committed in the Stalin era
or Brezhnev or under Lenin. And there's a little
bit of that and and and even in the
trial, there was some discussion of some of the
crimes of the Communist Party. The part of the
story I think we missed, maybe we misunderstood at
the time, or maybe we misremembered later, is that
the trial was actually caused by a lawsuit filed
by the Communist Party, which sued Boris Yeltsin's government
for outlawing it, and the communists won the trial.
That is the was trying to ban them on
the grounds they weren't really a political party, but
this kind of criminal structure of fusing with state
organs, which in a way is right, they kind
of are a little bit of both. The communists
won the case. And this isn't totally surprising because
uh most of those who were sitting in judgment
were themselves communists, even Yeltsin himself was a lifelong
communist. I mean, nearly everyone in the in the
Russian political establishment, including Putin, of course, they're all
communists. I mean, that's kind of what you would
expect. They grew out of the communist system and
so even if they may no longer have wanted
the government to practice the same policies of the
Soviet Union. They didn't really want a full reckoning
either. And so the, the opening of the archives
for a little while in the early 90s, kind
of slowed down and in recent years it's gone
into reverse. You know, even with some such things
as like the Captain Forest massacre of 1940, which
during the Cold War, the Soviets always insisted was
a Nazi crime. They finally owned up to this
in 1990. Putin even issued a kind of groveling,
but not really totally sincere apology for it in
2009 to Poland. Now again, they're asserting that it
either didn't happen or it wasn't us, you know,
like there's been a, a reversion, there's been kind
of backsliding. Um, NOW the broader story, I suppose
China is the most obvious refutation of the idea
that communism perished or communism died, the CCP is
still in power in China, through their policies, some
people might say, well, you have private property in
China and you have these vast fortunes and you
have these people who seem like entrepreneurs. Well, yeah,
sure, there there are certain, you might say violations
of some precise dictionary definition of communism requiring the
full state ownership of all the means of production.
But this was always true of of all communist
regimes. It was true the height of Stalinism was
true the height of Maoism. The communists have never
fully succeeded in eradicating all of private property because
that's basically impossible. You're always going to have some
type of a black market. People will always have
some private property that the state cannot confiscate might
try to do so and aspires to do so.
And even at the height of, let's say the
five-year plans under Stalin, the Soviets were still employing
and contracting with a lot of Western firms to
do business in Russia. A lot of the blast
factories were designed by American capitalist firms and so
on. And so that level of kind of almost
Uh, collaboration or Tolerance of Western capitalist firms doing
business in communist China and then communist versions of
these firms. Now that's always kind of been the
case. The difference is still that the state in
China still has the final say on everything. The
state can basically decide, no, you know, that's not
a lot. We're gonna confiscate your property or we're
gonna put you in jail. Uh, THE state still
has the final word and the state still controls,
and this is maybe to me kind of the
real essence of it. Yes, communist regimes always aspired
to abolish private property. They aspired to enroll all
economic activity into the hands of the state. They
never fully succeeded. Where they did succeed, the statist
aspect was in terms of communication and surveillance, you
know, that is nothing outside the state. It's kind
of a more extreme version of how Mussolini actually
define defined fascism that. The state controls all and
so the state surveils, the state controls your movements,
what you're allowed to say, you know, you have
kind of censorship communication and that's what you obviously
have in China's social credit system, you know the
state can determine whether or not you're going to
succeed in life, you know, get into schools, get
jobs. If you run afoul of the state, they
can either arrest you, uh, send you into these
kind of forced labor camps or prisons. Expel you,
of course, in extreme cases kill you, and that's
still true in China. No, no other political parties
are allowed, that's obviously kind of also part of
the essence of communism, um, and you still have
other communist countries today too, Laos, Cambodia, North Korea,
again, to some extent, Cuba, it's a little bit
debatable even to some extent Cambodia, but in all
of these countries, political opposition parties are not allowed.
You have a totalitarian single party state. Now, do
we have that in the West? No, not exactly.
What we have instead are elements that I think
should concern us. Um, YOU know, we learned a
lot in the last 5 years in particular, in
the COVID era, but not just the COVID era,
about, uh, social credit systems, social media censorship, governments
increasingly almost working hand in glove with private firms
to monitor our communications. Some of this is our
own fault, of course, for uploading our private data
on the social media accounts. But I mean, in,
in some ways, you might say. That the dictators,
uh, in the kind of classic Cold War of
communism, whether in the Soviet Union or China or
the Eastern European satellites, you know, they could have
only dreamed of having the tools at their disposal
that modern states do, uh, to track the movement.
PEOPLE, you know, through these little devices we carry
around in our pockets, um, with all of the
CCTV's monitoring our movements, with even people uploading pictures
and videos of themselves, so that the states can
actually basically keep track of us at all times.
I think had the Soviets had those tools at
their disposal, they may not have gone bankrupt trying
to spy on and oppress their citizens. I mean
we can, I suppose we can, we can be
fortunate that That the Soviets under Brezhnev and then
drop off and and Chernenko and Gorbachev didn't have
those tools available. Uh, IF they did, I think
the Soviets would still be in power today. So
I think we have, we have to watch it.
We have to be very careful. We have to
protect our freedoms vigorously, um, and we have to
obviously watch out for this idea that There's only
one right way of thinking, you know, there's only
one legitimate political party that anyone who opposes the
consensus on some hot button topic should be ostracized
and canceled. I mean, all of these things are
are things that we've seen in a lot of
Western countries over the past few years. I mean,
a famous examples of people being arrested for social
media posts. Um, OR social media accounts being shut
down, you know, these might be softer versions, but
they all have echoes, I think, in communist history,
whether of Mao's great proletarian cultural revolution or the
social credit system under the Soviets, and I think
we all need to be on our guard, uh,
to protect our freedoms.
Great. So the book is again to overthrow the
world, the rise and fall and rise of communism.
Of course, I'm leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview. And Doctor Mc Mickin,
just before we go, would you like to tell
people where they can find you and your work
on the internet?
Well, my books are all available through reputable booksellers,
including Amazon, although, of course, most of us would
probably prefer that you buy them directly from the
publisher, which is Basic Books in the case of
of this book and many of my other books.
So basic books, you can go to their website.
Um, I don't really maintain an active social media
account. I'm a little bit wary of the same
type of government, uh, surveillance, but my literary agent
Andrew Loney. Um, HE does have a website, this
is L O W N I E and you
can Google my name, McMekan and Looney and, and
the books will all come up along with information
about which editions are available in translation and which
countries um that's all centrally collected um on my
author page uh Lowney.net. Um, AND so I, I
hope that people will obviously read the books, and
I welcome your comments and, um, and I welcome
any conversation that arises from them, that this has
been great. Thanks for having me on.
Oh, thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been a real
pleasure to everyone.
Thank you, Ricardo. Yup.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Frankortolotti Gabrielon Scorteseus
Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diota Anton Eriksson,
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow
atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael
Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu,
Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris
Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon,
Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis,
Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud
Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings,
David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers. These are Webb,
Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernardin Curtis Dixon,
Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Giancarlo
Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.